# Semantics of Empire: A Neural Machine Translation Approach for Ottoman Turkish Texts

Semantics of Empire presents the preliminary results of developing a neural machine translation (NMT) model to translate Ottoman Turkish (OT) into English. Our research is motivated by the need to enhance the accessibility of primary or historical sources in higher education. The proposed NMT model aims to provide a first-pass translation tool for scholars, facilitating the integration of non-English historical texts into teaching and research, thereby democratizing access to diverse historical accounts. The project also investigates the potential of multilingual NMT for languages with limited resources, using OT as a case study and leveraging its relation to the more resourced modern Turkish. Similarly, OT's status as an extinct language with no possibility of generating new texts make it an ideal candidate for testing sentence alignment techniques for utilizing existing archival and translated materials.

Despite the lack of a dedicated MT system for OT-EN translation, and the considerable linguistic differences between OT and modern Turkish, including vocabulary and syntactic structures, there is a growing interest in leveraging large language models (LLMs) like OpenAI's ChatGPT for initial translation efforts. This paper presents the first structured analysis of the 'emergent capability' of LLMs to translate OT, assessing their effectiveness and reliability. The findings highlight the potential of generative models in translating extinct languages, while also pointing out the limitations and challenges in ensuring accurate and interpretable translations.

Scripts and datasets for my CS224N Winter 2024 Final Project on Ottoman Neural Machine Translation can be found in this repository
